# P202: Determine the prime factors of a given positive integer

>In number theory, integer factorization is the decomposition of a composite number into a product of smaller integers. If these integers are further restricted to prime numbers, the process is called prime factorization.
>
>By the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, every positive integer has a unique prime factorization. (By convention, 1 is the empty product.) Testing whether the integer is prime can be done in polynomial time, for example, by the AKS primality test. If composite, however, the polynomial time tests give no insight into how to obtain the factors.

[Integer factorization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integer_factorization)

Test case:

[include](../../../tests/arithmetic/p202_test.py)

## Trial Division

>Trial division is the most laborious but easiest to understand of the integer factorization algorithms. The essential idea behind trial division tests to see if an integer n, the integer to be factored, can be divided by each number in turn that is less than n. For example, for the integer n = 12, the only numbers that divide it are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12. Selecting only the largest powers of primes in this list gives that 12 = 3 × 4 = 3 × 22.
>
>Trial division was first described by Fibonacci in his book Liber Abaci (1202).

Given an integer N, if it's divisible by a prime number, then the prime numbe is one of N's prime factors; Dividing quotient by the prime number repeatedly, if not divisible, then try next prime number; until quotient is prime number.

For example, given integer `315`:

1. Firstly, divide it by smallest prime number 2, found it's not divisible by 2 $$315 \mod 2 == 1$$
2. Then divide by next prime number `3`, found it's divisible by `3` and quotient is `105`. Therefore `3` is one of prime factors
3. Then divide quotient `105` by `3`, found it's divisible and quotient is `35`. Therefore the prime factors contains two `3`
4. Then divide quotient `35` by `3`, found it's not divisible. Then divide quotient `35` by next prime number `5`, found it's divisible and quotient is `7`, therefore `5` is one of the prime factors
5. The quotient `7` is prime number, it's the last one prime factor. Finally get prime factors `[3,3,5,7]`

$$
\begin{align*}
315 &= 2^0 \times 315 \tag{1} \\
    &= 2^0 \times 3^1 \times 105 \tag{2} \\
    &= 2^0 \times 3^2 \times 35 \tag{3} \\
    &= 2^0 \times 3^2 \times 5^1 \times 7 \tag{4} \\
    & = 2^0 \times 3^2 \times 5^1 \times 7^1 \tag{5}
\end{align*}
$$

### Code

[include:-16](../../../python99/arithmetic/p202.py)

For implementing above algorithm, we need two support functions: `is_prime` and `next_prime`. It reuses implementation of P201 as `is_prime`. But `next_prime` must be implemented here. According to **Bertrand's postulate**, given integer n, it must find one prime number between n and 2n.

>Bertrand's postulate is a theorem stating that for any integer $$n>3$$, there always exists at least one prime number $$p$$ with
>
>$${\displaystyle n<p<2n-2.}$$
>
>A less restrictive formulation is: for every $$n>1$$ there is always at least one prime $$p$$ such that
>
>$${\displaystyle n<p<2n.}$$
>
>Another formulation, where $$p_{n}$$ is the $$n-th$$ prime, is for $$n\geq 1$$
>
>$${\displaystyle p_{n+1}<2p_{n}.}$$

Code of `next_prime`:

[include:18-](../../../python99/arithmetic/p202.py)

## Reference

* [Integer factorization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integer_factorization)
* [Trial division](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trial_division)
* [Bertrand's postulate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bertrand%27s_postulate)